The Upper Avon Valley Collieries. The Upper Avon Valley had five working
collieries on vesting day. Nantelite Colliery sunk in 1884 closed October
1948. North Rhondda Colliery, North Pit, sunk in 1908 closed July 1960. Dufferin
Rhondda, unknown which year it was sunk, closed November 1966. Avon Colliery, sunk
in 1877 closed September 1969. Glyncorug Colliery, South Pit, sunk 1904 closed May
1970. Most of the miners from Glyncorug would have worked at South Pit which
employed 772 men in 1950 or in North Pit which employed 220 men in 1954. Both of
these pits were within half a mile of the village. Nantelite Colliery, the
deepest of all the Upper Avon Collieries, was about a mile further down the valley.
Work in the mines was both dirty and dangerous but each pit had its own
peculiar conditions. Some would work high seams other much lower seams as
low as two feet which meant that most of the time they were lying on their sides
to fill the coal. During the summer months the men would swim with their
children in the River Corug in makeshift swimming pools. You could always tell
the men from South Pit by their strong well-developed stomach muscles which
came from working the low seams. Whilst the community of Glyncorug was strong
and close-knit the pits could be said to represent a community within a
community so to speak. This was no more evident than when entering any of the
public houses at the time. The men from South Pit would sit together in groups
as with those from North Pit. Not that they were not good mates because they
were but because members of the individual groups had something in
common. They worked at the same pit and the topic of conversation was always the
same. What happened today in their pit? It was often said that there was more coal
produced in the pub than ever there was in the pits. The largest of the
collieries in the area was Dufferinrondhe, situated at the mouth of the
Corug Valley which in 1950 employed 1,031 men. Located in the village of
Abergynvie around four miles from Glyncorug in the upper reaches of the
Avon Valley was the Avon Colliery which in 1950 had a workforce of 669 men.
Within a space of 10 years between 1960 and 1970 all the collieries in the upper
Avon had closed with a loss of 2,596 jobs. In 1961 the population of
Glyncorug stood at 1,862 but by 1991 this had been reduced to just 1,247, a
massive 33% reduction over a 30-year period. When South Pit closed in 1970 the
South Wales Mineral Railway also closed which left Glyncorug and the rest of the
upper Avon Valley isolated, effectively cutting them off from the lucrative
coastal belt.